# Development of a Deep Learning Model for Trash Classification in Real-World Conditions

## Abstract

As waste mismanagement continues to grow and contribute to climate change, the need for waste sorting and sustainable recycling becomes increasingly important to maintain the world’s expanding population and industrialization. Trash classification through deep learning offers an efficient and automated solution to sorting waste which can be sustainable and scaled in the long-term. Nevertheless, waste found in real-world environments can be cluttered, damaged, or in low-light conditions, making it difficult for models trained on clean and unblemished data to perform well in these conditions. Past research on trash classification models tends to focus on a single dataset and improve accuracy across that training period. Using data augmentation and Convoluted Neural Networks (CNNs), a model was developed on thousands of landfill waste images from the RealWaste dataset to address the varying conditions of trash in the real world. This initial model was subsequently enhanced through additional training on the EcoSort dataset, which proved instrumental in capturing diverse waste characteristics and environmental conditions. The combined training approach was fine-tuned and generalized to perform on realistic, unseen trash data from the TrashNet dataset and its accuracy was evaluated. Overall, the model was balanced to achieve a classification and prediction accuracy of 89% and 86%, respectively. While the final model demonstrated robust performance across all three datasets, with significant improvements in cross-domain classification accuracy on TrashNet or supplementary waste datasets, additional refinements could further enhance its reliability for real-world applications.

## Repository

This repository contains the notebook files with two separate research attempts in improving cross-domain trash classification. The file "dann_training.ipynb" is the Domain-Adversarial Neural Network approach which overall underperformed when compared to "efficientnet_training_improved.ipynb" that contains the domain augmentation + additional data approach. 
